\chapter{Conclusions}

\section{Correlation within floral plant community diversity and pollination networks'}
We investigated how the floral plant community and the pollination networks changed with respect to the habitat types present in the area and to seasonality from April to October. 
Field observations revealed significant spatial and temporal variations.
The presented results revealed that both the floral plant communities and the plant-pollinator networks changed depending on the micro-habitat they are found in and that they undergo significant seasonal reorganization, with different structural configurations, functional properties, and resilience characteristics in different periods of the flowering season.

It is important to note that the survey is subject to some limitations. There is a lack of information about the natural-habitat and the pollinator communities nearby the study area. The number of sample areas is small and uneven being already assigned by the project, for example here we asses only one riparian area and two of each for Maquis and Meadow. Even though it will continue, the study has so far lasted only these 7 months we discuss here, so some of the information might be biased by the short term data. Given this short time period one of the problems is that the specialization in plant-pollinator interactions might be highly overestimated.
This is because many plant or pollinator species can appear to be specialists inoneyear, but tend to be generalists or to interact with different partner species when observed in other years \parencite{petanidouLongtermObservationPollination2008}. There also is a lack of taxonomic detail that reduces significantly the reliability of the information sorted about the community network, most importantly at insect level. Further studies are necessary to gain a deeper 
understanding of these communities dynamics. 


\subsection{Spacial variation}

\subparagraph{Maquis}, the habitat is characterized by high floral abundance but low evenness, it is dominated by a few species, it has the highest floral cover. Its network has the highest robustness (0.86) and lowest specialization ($H2' = 0.30$), making it resilient and generalized. This structure is likely underpinned by the high abundance of a few key plant species that provide a broad resource base for generalist pollinators, creating redundancy.

\subparagraph{Meadow}, is the habitat that supports the highest floral diversity ($H' = 2.60$) and the most equitable flower abundances ($J' = 0.79$), this translates to a network with moderate specialization ($H2' = 0.42$) and high functional complementarity, indicating good niche partitioning. It supports the most diverse pollination network ($H' = 3.25$) and exhibits moderate robustness and nestedness. 

\subparagraph{Riparian}, the habitat is characterized by the lowest floral diversity and abundance, so it supports the most vulnerable and specialized network. It has the lowest Shannon diversity ($H' = 2.47$), highest specialization ($H2' = 0.58$), and lowest robustness. Limited floral resources lead to a sparse, highly nested network with high functional redundancy and low complementarity, making it more fragile to disturbances.

\subsection{Temporal variation}
Trying to describe seasonal changes in floral resources and pollination networks from April to October we found three phases cycle of abundances and diversity. 

In spring (April to May) there is a flowering pulse dominated by a few species like \textit{Sulla coronaria} L., and the network has low richness but it is highly specialized ($H2' = 0.84$ in April) and nested. This creates an efficient but fragile environment for early-season pollinators.

In early Summer (June to July) there is the peak in floral species richness, so that the network transforms: Shannon diversity ($H'$), linkage density ($LD$), and functional complementarity ($FC$) peak, while specialization collapses ($H2' = 0.23$ in June). This creates a highly connected, redundant, and resilient environment for maximum resource exploitation.

In late Summer/Autumn (August to October) resources decline and species richness drops. The network reorganizes into a tight, highly nested structure (peak $NODF = 30.70$ in September) with maximum evenness ($J'$), forming a persistent core that efficiently integrates remaining visitors to overcome scarcity of resources.

This progression is not just linear increase and decrease in activity, but a strategic restructuring of interaction architecture to optimize function and resilience across the contrasting challenges of the Mediterranean seasonal cycle.\par



\section{Restoration actions and future perspectives}
This ex-ante assessment provides the ecological reference framework for restoration actions that will be progressively implemented in the coming years within the Gello Revival project. Therefore, this preliminary data has the objective of analyzing actual effectiveness of pollinator-friendly management practices in these agricultural sites trough ex-post monitoring. 

These findings suggest that a greater diversity or abundance of flowering plants is associated with pollinators presence and network's resilience which directly influences the whole ecosystem's health and functioning. 
So based on the pattern observed there already exist a solid plant-pollinators community, therefore, in rural environment such as these, restoration efforts should primarily focus on low-impact practices such as delayed or reduced mowing, diversification of crop margins, and the establishment of flower strips, while simultaneously safeguarding and potentially expanding areas that already display high natural value all to enhance flowering flora's diversity that would positively reflect on wild pollinators' community. A particular focus might be put in maintaining micro-habitats diversities while increasing connectivity to strengthen wicker networks. This, including site-specific approaches to habitat restoration and management like the development of green infrastructure such as hedgerows, tree lines, isolated trees, provide nesting and shelter opportunities for pollinators, and contribute to greater temporal and spatial continuity of floral resources. In addition, future restoration activities may include the creation of new ecological niches aimed at increasing landscape heterogeneity and functional diversity within the agricultural matrix.


The effectiveness of such pollinator friendly measures in similar agricultural locations in Italy has been proved already \parencite{bitontoPollinationServiceEnvironmental2025}.


The patterns documented in this study, exist within a broader agricultural landscape typical of the region. In recent decades, the homogenization of Mediterranean farming systems, marked by monocultures, chemical inputs, and the eradication of natural habitats has degraded environmental health, provoking biodiversity loss. The positive associations we observed between floral diversity and pollinator networks are not to be considered just local results but indicators of a resilient ecological logic that intensive agriculture systematically disrupts. Therefore, while site‑specific habitat enhancements are a vital first step, they ultimately function as compensatory measures within an unsustainable model. A truly effective and scalable response must realign agricultural practice with ecological principles at the system level. This points toward the need to revive and modernize traditional diversified farming, particularly through the adoption of agroforestry systems. By consciously integrating trees, crops, and livestock, agroforestry restores structural complexity, habitat connectivity, and resource continuity at the landscape scale, directly enhancing the floral and pollinator communities \parencite{rezguiAssessingMediterraneanAgroforestry2024}. Thus, the evidence from the Gello project converges with a growing body of research advocating for a transition from input‑intensive monocultures to multifunctional, biodiverse agroecosystems as the most promising pathway to sustain both pollination services and long‑term farming resilience across the Mediterranean region\parencite{santosEditorialCanTrees2023a}.


%TRADITIONAL AGRICULTURE VS MONOCULTURE SYSTEM 

Such diverse farming systems have better results in both food yields and income generation compared to industrial monocultures.
By reviving traditional crops and community-based practices that were abandoned during the push for industrialization, societies can unlock resilient and sustainable pathways to food security. Far from reducing productivity, these approaches strengthen ecological balance, diversify diets, and empower local economies. Policymakers and agricultural stakeholders should therefore recognize that investing in biodiversity is not a nostalgic return to the past, but a forward-looking strategy to increase production while safeguarding the environment and rural livelihoods \parencite{shivaTerraVivaMia2022}.
% GREEN REVOLUTION E TECHNOLOGIES 
%Today technology is seen as being above society both in its structure and its evolution, in its offering technological fixes, and in its technological determinism. It is seen as a source of solution to problems that lie in society, and is rarely perceived as a source of new social problems. Its course is viewed as being self-determined.
In periods of rapid technological transformation, it is assumed that society and people must adjust to that change, instead of technological change adjusting to the social values of equity, sustainability and participation. \parencite{shivaViolenceGreenRevolution1991}


